[New package] Vizro MCP server (#1125)
mckinsey/vizro: vizro-mcp/README.md

✅ One consistent framework for charts and dashboards with one common design language. ✅ Validated config output that is readable and easy to alter or maintain. ✅ Live preview of the dashboard to iterate the design until the dashboard is perfect. ✅ Use of local or remote datasets simply by providing a path or URL.

### Without Vizro-MCP

Without Vizro-MCP, if you try to make a dashboard using an LLM, it could choose any framework, and use it without specific guidance, design principles, or consistency. The results are:

❌ A random choice of frontend framework or charting library. ❌ A vibe-coded mess that may or may not run, but certainly is not very maintainable. ❌ No way to easily preview the dashboard. ❌ No easy way to connect to real data.

## 🛠️ Get started

If you are a **developer** and need instructions for running Vizro-MCP from source, skip to the end of this page to [Development or running from source](#development-or-running-from-source).

### Prerequisites

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/)
- [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/download) or [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/downloads)

> In principle, the Vizro MCP server works with _any_ MCP enabled client but we recommend Claude Desktop or Cursor as popular choices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In principle, the Vizro MCP server works with _any_ MCP enabled LLM applications but we recommend Claude Desktop or Cursor as popular choices.
```
I leave it to you to decide - Ideally I think we should have a consist definition for tools like claude desktop. client, host, LLM application or AI application.

> 🐛 **Note:** There are currently some known issues with [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) but we are working on this and hope to have Copilot working soon.

> ⚠️ **Warning:** In some hosts (like Claude Desktop) the free plan might be less performant, which may cause issues when the request is too complex. In cases where the request causes the UI to crash, opt for using a paid plan, or reduce your request's complexity.

### Installation

> Once you have installed the MCP host application, you need to configure the Vizro MCP server details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have installed the <a consistent name>, you need to configure the Vizro MCP server details.
```

**For Claude**: Add the following to your `claude_desktop_config.json` [found via Developer Settings](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/quickstart/user#2-add-the-filesystem-mcp-server).

> **For Cursor**: Add the following to `mcp.json` [found via the Cursor Settings](https://docs.cursor.com/context/model-context-protocol#configuration-locations).

Reviewer: Maybe use tabs to separate instructions related to Cluade vs. Cursor? Now the guide jumps between two examples and it's hard to follow

> Different AI tools may use different setup methods or connection settings. Check each tool's docs for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different <a consistent name> may use different setup methods or connection settings. Check each tool's docs for details.
```

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "vizro-mcp": {
      "command": "uvx",
      "args": [
        "vizro-mcp"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> ⚠️ **Warning:** In some cases you may need to provide the full path to your `uv` executable, so instead of `uv` would use something like `/Users/<your-username>/.local/bin/uv`. To discover the path of `uv` on your machine, in your terminal app, type `which uv`.

If you are using Claude Desktop, restart it, and after a few moments, you should see the vizro-mcp menu when opening the settings/context menu:

<img src="assets/claude_working.png" alt="Claude Desktop MCP Server Icon" width="150"/>

Similarly, when using Cursor, after a short pause, you should see a green light in the MCP menu:

> <img src="assets/cursor_working.png" alt="Claude Desktop MCP Server Icon" width="400"/>

Reviewer: Put into 2 tabs?

In general the most critical part of the process is the `load_and_analyze_data` tool. This tool, running on your machine, will load local or remote data into a pandas DataFrame and provide a detailed analysis of its structure and content. It only uses `pd.read_xxx`, so in general there is no need to worry about privacy or data security.

The second most critical part is the `validate_model_config` tool. This tool will attempt to instantiate the Vizro model configuration and return the Python code and visualization link for valid configurations. If the configuration is valid, it will also return and attempt to open a link to a live preview of the dashboard, which will take you to [PyCafe](https://py.cafe). If you don't want to open the link, you can tell the LLM to not do so.

## Available Tools (if client allows)

The Vizro MCP server provides the following tools. In general you should not need to use them directly, but in special cases you could ask the LLM to call them directly to help it find its way.

> - `get_vizro_chart_or_dashboard_plan` - Call this tool first to get a structured step-by-step plan for creating either a chart or dashboard. Provides guidance on the entire creation process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `get_vizro_chart_or_dashboard_plan` - Get a structured step-by-step plan for creating either a chart or dashboard. Provides guidance on the entire creation process.
```

- `get_overview_vizro_models` - Returns a comprehensive overview of all available models in the `vizro.models` namespace, organized by category.
- `get_model_JSON_schema` - Retrieves the complete JSON schema for any specified Vizro model, useful for understanding required and optional parameters.
- `validate_model_config` - Tests Vizro model configurations by attempting to instantiate them. Returns Python code and visualization links for valid configurations.
- `load_and_analyze_csv` - Loads a CSV file from a local path or URL into a pandas DataFrame and provides detailed analysis of its structure and content.
- `validate_chart_code` - Validates the code created for a chart and returns feedback on its correctness.
- `get_sample_data_info` - Provides information about sample datasets that can be used for testing and development.

## Available Prompts (if client allows)

- `create_starter_dashboard` - Use this prompt template to get started with Vizro dashboards.

> - `create_EDA_dashboard` - Use this prompt template to create an Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) dashboard based on a local or remote CSV dataset

Reviewer: Could we consolidate these 2 prompts for dash-boarding? any specific reasons why we'd keep both?

Author: I think prompts are not so import to keep few right, I'd even say a few more the merrier?

# Vizro MCP server

Vizro-MCP is a [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/) server, which works alongside a LLM to help you create Vizro dashboards and charts.

## Features of Vizro-MCP

Vizro-MCP provides tools and templates to create a functioning Vizro chart or dashboard step by step. Benefits include:

> ✅ One consistent framework for charts and dashboards with one common design language. ✅ Validated config output that is readable and easy to alter or maintain. ✅ Live preview of the dashboard to iterate the design until the dashboard is perfect. ✅ Use of local or remote datasets simply by providing a path or URL.

Reviewer 2: I see my attempt to space the lines using triple end spacing failed because the linter removed it. Do you want to go back to double spaced paragraphs here and below?

> _Create a simple two page Vizro dashboard, with first page being a correlation analysis of `<insert absolute file path or public URL>` data, and the second page being a map plot of `<insert absolute file path or public URL>` data_

You can even ask for a dashboard without providing data:

> _Create a Vizro dashboard with one page, a scatter chart, and a filter._

In general, it helps to specify Vizro in the prompt and to keep it as precise (and simple) as possible.

### Get a live preview of your dashboard

When the LLM chooses to use the tool `validate_model_config`, and the tool executes successfully, the LLM will return a link to a live preview of the dashboard if only public data accessed via URL is used. By default, the LLM will even open the link in your browser for you unless you tell it not to. In Claude Desktop, you can see the output of the tool by opening the tool collapsible and scrolling down to the very bottom.

<img src="assets/claude_validate.png" width="300"/>

You can also ask the model to give you the link, but it will attempt to regenerate it, which is very error prone and slow.

> ### Create Vizro charts

Reviewer 2: I think it would help new users to say what the difference is between a chart and a dashboard. It's so obvious to us but it bears telling that sometimes you may just want the code for a single chart (and you could point at the visual vocabulary for good measure to illustrate some of the examples of chart code we provide).

- `get_model_JSON_schema` - Retrieves the complete JSON schema for any specified Vizro model, useful for understanding required and optional parameters.
- `validate_model_config` - Tests Vizro model configurations by attempting to instantiate them. Returns Python code and visualization links for valid configurations.
- `load_and_analyze_csv` - Loads a CSV file from a local path or URL into a pandas DataFrame and provides detailed analysis of its structure and content.
- `validate_chart_code` - Validates the code created for a chart and returns feedback on its correctness.
- `get_sample_data_info` - Provides information about sample datasets that can be used for testing and development.

## Available Prompts (if client allows)

- `create_starter_dashboard` - Use this prompt template to get started with Vizro dashboards.
- `create_EDA_dashboard` - Use this prompt template to create an Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) dashboard based on a local or remote CSV dataset
- `create_vizro_chart` - Use this prompt template to create a Vizro styled plotly chart based on a local or remote CSV dataset

> ## Sample data

Reviewer 2: I'd make this a subsection of the section starting line 98 to make it more prominent.

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/mckinsey/vizro/pull/1151/commits/22292bba56864628bbe45d09fe60047a312d5c2e

You can find a set of sample CSVs to try out in the [Plotly repository](https://github.com/plotly/datasets/tree/master).

## Development or running from source

If you are a developer, or if you are running Vizro-MCP from source, you need to clone the Vizro repo. To configure the Vizro MCP server details:

**For Claude**: Add the following to your `claude_desktop_config.json` [found via Developer Settings](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/quickstart/user#2-add-the-filesystem-mcp-server):

**For Cursor**: Add the following to `mcp.json` [found via the Cursor Settings](https://docs.cursor.com/context/model-context-protocol#configuration-locations):

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "vizro-mcp": {
      "command": "uv",
      "args": [
        "run",
        "--directory",
        "<PATH TO VIZRO>/vizro-mcp/",
        "vizro-mcp"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Replace `<PATH TO VIZRO>` with the actual path to your Vizro repository. You may also need to provide the full path to your `uv` executable, so instead of `"uv"` you would use something like `"/Users/<your-username>/.local/bin/uv"`. To discover the path of `uv` on your machine, in your terminal app, type `which uv`.

> ## Other cool MCP Servers

Reviewer 2: This is nice but not relevant really? I'd remove it.

Reviewer 2: I did this in a separate commit (https://github.com/mckinsey/vizro/pull/1151/commits/4fca688f01d4fbf638539def663593879fe27300) in case you want to revert this but leave the other changes.

# Vizro MCP Server

A Model Context Protocol (MCP) server that helps create Vizro dashboards and charts interactively. For mode information on MCP - we recommend the [these resources and the links within](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction).

## Features

- create Vizro dashboards with prompts from your IDE or Claude Desktop
- iterate the design until the dashboard is perfect

> - use local or remote datasets

Author: i prefer to use 2nd person (or whatever it's called in english :) ) all along!

- take advantage of specialized prompt templates to guide dashboard creation (Claude Desktop only)

... and best of all, your result is Vizro config, so well structured, readable, (almost) guaranteed to run and no Vibe coded mess!

## Prerequisites

- [Claude Desktop](https://claude.ai/download) or [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/downloads)
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/)

> We are working on getting [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with Copilot working soon.

Reviewer: I tested with vscode. 2 ("validate_model_config" and "get_validated_chart_code") out 6 of tools would cause this TypeError: https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-copilot-release/issues/8165

Maybe because the Copilot has issue understand the schemas of these 2 tools.
